To generate an sdelta between two source tarballs:

sdelta     glibc-2.3.2.tar  \
           glibc-2.3.3.tar  |
bzip2 -9 > glibc-2.3.2-2.3.3.tar.sdelta.bz2

The above example creates a bzip2 compressed 
sdelta of the glibc-2.3.2.tar and glibc-2.3.3.tar
Type it all on one line if you prefer omitting the \

Now the produced delta file can be used in conjunction
with the first source to generate the second.

( bzcat  glibc-2.3.2-2.3.3.tar.sdelta.bz2
    cat  glibc-2.3.2.tar ) | 
sdelta > glibc-2.3.3

Of course you can choose to decompress the sdelta first:

bunzip2  glibc-2.3.2-2.3.3.tar.sdelta.bz2
cat      glibc-2.3.2-2.3.3.tar.sdelta \
         glibc-2.3.2.tar |
sdelta > glibc-2.3.3.tar

And if you use FreeBSD you will want to avoid using stdin completely:

sdelta glibc-2.3.2.tar glibc-2.3.2-2.3.3.tar.sdelta > glibc-2.3.3.tar

Remember when both generating and applying sdelta patches
that the dictionary file is the first filename parameter.
Only when the sdelta patch and dictionary file are provided
through stdin does the sdelta patch file come first.

If bash shell syntax is confusing 
then please read the bash manual page by typing :  man  bash

I prefer to pipe data when possible between programs.

Using curl and bzip2 for example one can download a 
sdelta patch file, decompress it in stream without 
writing it to disk, pipe it into sdelta along 
with the decompressed dictionary file and have
the to-file written out or processed in stream by
another program without writing anything to disk.
No waste, no temporary file, 
do it all in one long piped command.

sdelta does not use temporary files. 
It does not discard data until it is no longer needed.
sdelta is optimized to use as much memory as required
to perform it's task and maybe even more than is installed.
Therefore, when working with large files, such as linux
source tarballs, please enable adequate swap space. 
While sdelta may allocate and hold a large portition
of memory the memory it is actively using at any time
is usually relatively small and therefore should not
constantly grind the swap on all except the most limited boxes.
